---
layout: post
title:  "New Paper on easterly wave packets and instability"
date:   2020-09-22 08:54:45 -0400
categories: paper
---

A new paper (With Dylan White) on easterly waves was submitted to WCD. Comments and reviews are welcome and can be included in the open discussions linked below:

|[African Easterly Waves in an Idealized General Circulation Model: Instability and Wavepacket Diagnostics](https://wcd.copernicus.org/preprints/wcd-2020-47/)


|**Plain language Summary**| 
African easterly waves are weather disturbances of the North African monsoon system. Their formation has been traditionally linked to energy exchanges with the African easterly jet, which is a narrow ribbon of fast winds in the lower-to-middle troposphere over North Africa. A few recent studies have suggested that this jet can be stabilized by damping. Further, they have also claimed that it is too short to sustain the amplification of the easterly waves. We use simulations with a simple general circulation model to capture some basic properties of the observed wave propagation. We show that the wavepackets remain nearly stationary within the jet. This increases their residence time with the jet. We suggest that, because the wavepackets are not swept out of the jet, this provides the opportunity for them to amplify via feedback from additional sources of energy associated with rain-producing cloud systems and Saharan mineral dust. The roles of these two processes, although not included in our analysis, have been shown in numerous other studies. Our results show the importance of wavepacket behaviour in understanding how African easterly waves are maintained in the real atmosphere.|

